Course Date
12/28/2015

Course Overview
	An active shooter is an individual actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a confined and other populated area. In most cases, active shooters use firearms and there is no pattern or method to their selection of victims. Active shooter situations are unpredictable and evolve quickly. All employees can help prevent and prepare for potential active shooter situations. This course provides guidance to individuals, including managers and employees, so that they can prepare to respond to an active shooter situation. This course is not written for law enforcement officers, but for non-law enforcement employees. The material may provide law enforcement officers information on recommended actions for non-law enforcement employees to take should they be confronted with an active shooter situation.

Course Objectives:
Upon completing this course, the participant will be able to:
	Describe actions to take when confronted with an active shooter and responding law enforcement officials. 	Recognize potential workplace violence indicators. 	Describe actions to take to prevent and prepare for potential active shooter incidents.
	Describe how to manage the consequences of an active shooter incident.
-------------------
Course Overview
This course provides guidance to individuals, including managers and employees, so that they can prepare to respond to an active shooter situation.
=By the end of this course, you will be able to:
	Describe actions to take when confronted with an active shooter and responding law enforcement officials. Recognize potential workplace violence indicators. Describe actions to take to prevent and prepare for potential active shooter incidents. Describe how to manage the consequences of an active shooter incident. Not all recommendations provided here will be applicable at every facility. This course is intended to provide guidance to enhance facility-specific plans and procedures.

Active Shooter Incidents Video Transcript
	Losing a loved one to a random act of violence is unthinkable. Unfortunately, recent events serve to remind us that we are not immune from these types of tragedies. As we know, an active shooting event can occur at any time or any place. During the past several years, there have been active shooter incidents where we shop [2007 … Gunman kills 5 and injures multiple others at a Utah mall], where we exercise our free speech [2011 … Representative Gifford critically shot while meeting with constituents at a market – 6 people killed and 3 others injured], where we learn [1999 … Columbine High School 12 students and 1 teacher killed; 2007 … Virginia Tech 32 killed and many others wounded; 2008 Northern Illinois University 5 students killed on campus], and where we work [2005 … Gunman opens fire at beer distributor, killing 8 people]. An active shooter is an individual actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a confined and populated area. In most cases, there is no pattern or method to their selection of victims. Most active shooter situations are unpredictable and evolve quickly. Because most incidents are over within minutes, we must be prepared to deal with the situation until law enforcement personnel arrive. And, preparedness and awareness are the keys to helping protect our employees, our customers, and ourselves.

-- Understanding Active Shooter Incidents
	Active shooter incidents are becoming more frequent. All employees can help prevent and prepare for potential active shooter situations., An active shooter is an individual killing or attempting to kill people in a confined and populated area, Typically, there is no pattern in the selection of victims in an active shooter incident., Common motives include, anger, revenge, ideology, and untreated mental illness.
-- Active Shooter Profile
	An active shooter is an individual actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a confined space or other populated area. In most cases, active shooters use firearms and there is no pattern or method to their selection of victims.
	Active shooter situations are unpredictable and evolve quickly. Typically, the immediate deployment of law enforcement is required to stop the shooting and mitigate harm to victims. Active shooters usually will continue to move throughout building or area until stopped by law enforcement, suicide, or other intervention.
-- Active Shooter Booklet
	The information presented in this course is summarized in the booklet titled “Active Shooter: How To Respond,” published by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. , The booklet provides guidance to individuals, including managers and employees, who become involved in an active shooter situation, and discusses how to react when law enforcement responds.
-- Active Shooter Desk Reference Guide
	The remainder of this course is divided into the following sections: Respond, Prepare, and Follow Up. The next screens describe response actions to take to keep yourself safe in an active shooter situation.
	Graphics representing the three topic areas covered in the course: Respond, Prepare, and Follow Up

	Run. Hide. Fight.® Surviving an Active Shooter Event
Narrator: It may feel like just another day at the office.
	A series of shots shows a standard office. People work at cubicles. One desk has an American flag.
Narrator: But occasionally, life feels more like an action movie than reality.
	A muscular man dressed in all black, wearing sunglasses and carrying a backpack, walks towards the office building. Inside the building, the employees are still going about their daily tasks. A security guard talks with a woman. A visitor greets a staff member.
Narrator: The authorities are working hard to protect you and to protect our public spaces.
	Two employees say hello to each other and get into the elevator.
Narrator: But sometimes, bad people do bad things.
	We cut back to the sidewalk outside, as we continue to see the man in black approaching the building. As he walks, a series of facts are displayed on the screen.
Caption: 21 killed, 19 wounded at a fast food restaurant. 32 killed, 25 wounded while attending class.
Caption: 6 killed, 13 wounded at a shopping center.
Caption: 13 killed, 29 wounded while at work.
Narrator: The warning signs may vary, but the devastating effects are the same ... The man in black opens the front door of the building. As he enters, we see a notice on the glass prohibiting the carrying of concealed handguns in the building under penalty of trespass.
Narrator: ... and unfortunately, you need to be prepared for the worst. The camera pans past a series of people at their desks and stops in front of the elevator, where the security guard is talking with an employee. The man in black walks past the guard, removes a shotgun from his backpack, turns around, and shoots the security guard and two employees. More shots are fired. A woman at a photocopier hears the noise and looks around.
Narrator: If you are to ever find yourself in the middle of an active shooter event, your survival may depend on whether or not you have a plan.
The man in black stops shooting in the lobby and starts walking off.
Narrator: The plan doesn't have to be complicated. A man in a purple shirt looks up, startled. A woman hangs up a phone and looks down the hallway at the commotion.
Narrator: The plan doesn't have to be complicated. There are three things you could do that make a difference: Run. Hide. Fight. The woman who was on the phone stands up, moves into the hallway, and looks scared. Another woman, wearing pink, sits at her desk with an alarmed look on her face. She then gets out of her chair and moves under her desk.
Narrator: Remember what's important: you, not your stuff. Leave your belongings behind, and try to find a way to get out safely. The three employees leave the building through an emergency exit. The camera turns to a mechanical area behind the building, where another man is locking a bicycle to a bike rack.
Narrator: Trying to get yourself out of harm's way needs to be your number one priority.
	The three employees come around a bend and take shelter behind a cinderblock wall protecting mechanical equipment. They are now out of sight of the front of the building and the emergency exit. The man with the bicycle has headphones off, and walks off, looking at his phone. The man in purple runs out and gets the bicyclist's attention. One of the women screams "hey" at the cyclist.
Narrator: Once you are out of the line of fire, try to prevent others from walking into the danger zone and call 9-1-1.
	The man in purple leads the cyclist back to the area where the employees are sheltering. The woman who had been on the telephone calls the police from her cell phone. The woman in pink is still panicking, but remains with the group.
	A full-screen caption appears.
Caption: RUN. When an active shooter is in your vicinity:
	If there is an escape path, attempt to evacuate., Evacuate whether others agree to or not., Leave your belongings behind., Help others escape if possible., Prevent others from entering the area. The camera cuts back to the office, where we see the woman who was at the photocopier. She looks out the door, but quickly ducks back into the room.
Narrator: If you can't get out safely, you need to find a place to hide.Narrator: If you can't get out safely, you need to find a place to hide.
	The woman from the copier closes the copy room door and looks around the room. The camera cuts to a group sitting in the break room. More shots ring out. The employees in the break room stop talking and begin to look around. They all rise from the table at the same time. A man in a brown suit motions for the group to stay still for a minute, and a woman in red says "oh my gosh." The man in the suit looks out into the hallway and sees other people running at the far end of the hallway. He moves back into the break room and closes the door. Another man, in a blue shirt, signals the others to stay quiet as he and a man in yellow move the table to barricade the door.
Narrator: Act quickly and quietly. Try to secure your hiding place the best you can.
Narrator: Turn out lights, and if possible, remember to lock doors. Silence your ringer and vibration mode on your cell phone., The woman in the copy room slides the ringer volume control on her phone to silent, then turns the vibrate mode off. The camera cuts to the shooter, who is walking through a set of cubicles. The employees are all in hiding or have left the building. He reaches for a doorknob, but finds it locked and moves on.
Narrator: And if you can't find a safe room or closet, try to conceal yourself behind large objects that may protect you., The camera shows the woman in the copy room crouched in the corner between the wall and the copier, her eyes closed, silent.
Narrator: Do your best to remain quiet and calm.
Caption: HIDE. If an evacuation is not possible, find a place to hide.
	Lock and/or blockade the door., Silence your cell phone., Hide behind large objects., Remain very quiet.
Caption: Your hiding place should:, Be out of the shooter's view., Provide protection of shots are fired in your direction., Not trap or restrict your options for movement..
Narrator: As a last resort, if your life is at risk, whether you're alone or working together as a group, fight! Act with aggression. Improvise weapons. Disarm him ...
	The employees in the break room try to calm the woman who is panicking, and begin organizing themselves. The man in yellow picks up a chair. He looks apprehensive, but moves towards the door. The panicking woman moves into a corner. The man in brown stands to the side of the door, holding a fire extinguisher above his head, ready to swing. He silently mouths to the others, asking if they're ready.
Narrator: ... and commit to taking the shooter down, no matter what.
	The shooter enters the break room holding an assault rifle, and the employees attack. Two employees are holding coffee mugs, while the other two start to swing with the fire extinguisher and chair.
	A full-screen caption appears.
Caption: FIGHT. As a last resort, and only if your life is in danger:
	Attempt to incapacitate the shooter.
Narrator: Try to be aware of your environment. Always have an exit plan.
	The camera cuts back to the interior of the building. The police have arrived. Some are patrol officers, wearing blue uniforms. Others are part of the SWAT team, wearing camouflage fatigues and helmets. All the officers are holding assault rifles. They are entering in a tactical formation, with some officers looking forward while others check to the sides and behind them. They stay as a tight group.
Narrator: Know that in an incident like this, victims are generally chosen randomly. The event is unpredictable and may evolve quickly.
The officers begin entering offices one-by-one, searching for the shooter. They pass a man lying on the ground, continuing to search for the man in black.
Narrator: The first responders on the scene are not there to evacuate or tend to the injured. They are well-trained, and are there to stop the shooter. The music changes to a more upbeat, militaristic march. The police continue to do a room-by-room search as they pass by more casualties. Officers check each stall in a bathroom before moving down another hallway. A full-screen caption appears.

when 911 arrives
Remain calm and follow instructions., Keep your hands visible at all times., Avoid pointing or yelling.
Know that help for the injured is on its way.
	The front door of the building slams open and more employees pour out. They are running with their hands in the air, palms facing forward to demonstrate that they are not holding any weapons. A man assists others as they round a bend on an exterior stairwell. We then see a shot of a fire engine parked in front of the building.
Narrator: Your actions can make a difference for your safety and survival. Be aware and be prepared.
	More people leave the front door as a firefighter directs them towards a rallying point. More people are running down the exterior stairwell. As he rounds a landing, a man removes his suit jacket, but does not slow down. Other employees, including the group from the break room, are crouched on the ground by the fire engine, out of breath, but uninjured.
Narrator: And if you find yourself faced with an active shooter, there are three key things you need to remember to survive: Run. Hide. Fight.
	The camera pans across the employees congregated by the fire engine. Many are talking with one another. Others are on cell phones. A firefighter moves past, giving directions as the screen fades to black.
Caption: "Run. Hide. Fight.: Surviving an Active Shooter Event" is a Department of Homeland Security Grant Funded Project of the Regional Catastrophic Planning Initiative. Produced by the City of Houston Mayor's Office of Public Safety and Homeland Security. Ready Houston, www.readyhoustontx.gov.
Caption: For more information: www.readyhoustontx.gov.
End of film.

How To Respond
	Let’s review the key points from the video presentation. In an active shooter situation, you should quickly determine the most reasonable way to protect your own life. You should:
	Run: If there is an accessible escape path, attempt to evacuate the premises.
	Hide: If evacuation is not possible, find a place to hide where the active shooter is less likely to find you.
	Fight: As a last resort, and only when your life is in imminent danger, attempt to disrupt and/or incapacitate the active shooter.

	It is important for employees to be trained so that they can react if they are ever confronted with an active shooter situation. As these situations evolve quickly, quick decisions could mean the difference between life and death. If you are in harm’s way, you will need to decide rapidly what the safest course of action is based on the scenario that is unfolding before you.
	Run
	If there is an accessible escape path, attempt to evacuate the premises. Be sure to:

	Warn individuals not to enter an area where the active shooter may be. Have an escape route and plan in mind. Evacuate regardless of whether others agree to follow. Leave your belongings behind. Help others escape, if possible. Prevent individuals from entering an area where the active shooter may be. Keep your hands visible. Follow the instructions of any police officers. Do not attempt to move wounded people.
Call 911 when it is safe to do so.

Hide
If safe evacuation is not possible, find a place to hide where the active shooter is less likely to find you.
Your hiding place should:
Be out of the active shooter’s view. Provide protection if shots are fired in your direction (i.e., an office with a closed and locked door).
Not trap you or restrict your options for movement. To prevent an active shooter from entering your hiding place, Lock the door.
Blockade the door with heavy furniture., Close, cover, and move away from windows., Keeping Yourself Safe While Hiding


If the active shooter is nearby:
Lock the door., Silence your cell phone and/or pager. (Even the vibration setting can give away a hiding position.) Hide behind large items (i.e., cabinets, desks).. Remain quiet. Consider the difference between cover and concealment. Cover will protect from gunfire and concealment will merely hide you from the view of the shooter. Choose the best space that is available quickly., When Running and Hiding Are Not Possible, When possible, provide the following information to law enforcement officers or 911 operators:
Location of the active shooter., Number of shooters, if more than one., Physical description of the shooter(s)., Number and type of weapons held by the shooter(s)., Number of potential victims at the location., Fight. s an absolute last resort, and only when your life is in imminent danger, attempt to disrupt and/or incapacitate the active shooter:
	Act as aggressively as possible against him/her. Throw items and use improvised weapons. Work together to incapacitate the shooter.
	Commit to your actions. Reactions of Managers or Uniformed Personnel. 	When an emergency occurs, customers and visitors will look to employees to direct them to safety, as they are familiar with the building and workspace. Employees and customers are likely to follow the lead of managers or uniformed officials during an emergency situation.
During an emergency, managers should be prepared to:
Take immediate action., Remain calm, professional, and prepared to lead.
Lock and barricade doors.
	Evacuate employees and customers via a viable, preplanned evacuation route to a safe area.
	When pre-selecting shelter-in-place locations, consider any safe areas within the facility that provide good cover and concealment options.  Use whatever is available including desks tables, file cabinets, books, etc.  Stay behind solid objects and away from the door.
	When Law Enforcement Arrives
When law enforcement arrives:
	Remain calm and follow instructions., Slowly put down any items in your hands (e.g., bags, jackets)., Raise hands and spread fingers..Keep hands visible at all times., Avoid quick movements toward officers, such as holding on to them for safety., Avoid pointing, screaming, or yelling., Do not stop to ask officers for help or direction when evacuating, as they will be focused on finding and incapacitating the shooter. Not adhering to officers’ instructions puts everyone in danger.
	
Video Transcript - When Law Enforcement Arrives
	The primary goal of law enforcement is to eliminate the threat and stop the active shooter as soon as possible., As the first responders’ primary responsibility is to eliminate the threat, they will not be able to stop to help injured persons until the environment is safe., Officers may arrive in teams with tactical equipment such as vests, helmets, and rifles., Officers will need to take command of the situation. Expect to experience officers shouting orders and even pushing individuals to the ground for their safety. When law enforcement officials arrive, it is important that you:

Remain calm and follow instructions.
	Put down any items and immediately raise your hands while spreading your fingers., Avoid making any sudden movements and keep your hands visible at all times., Do not ask officers for help while you are being evacuated from the scene. Rescue personnel will be in a safe area to provide assistance., After you reach a safe location or assembly point, you’ll be asked to cooperate by providing information to investigators.
	Knowing what to expect will help you assist law enforcement officials as they work to stop an active shooter and eliminate the threat.

Law Enforcement’s Role, Let’s review what to expect when law enforcement officials arrive at an active shooter scene.
Law enforcement’s immediate purpose is to stop the active shooter as soon as possible. Officers will proceed directly to the area in which the last shots were heard., The first officers to arrive at the scene will not stop to help injured persons because their first priority is life safety, so they will need to secure the scene first.. When there is an emergency such as an active shooter incident, it is important to remember that officers arriving on scene may be coming from many different duty assignments and will likely be in various types of uniforms and even in street clothes. Do not be surprised by the variances in appearance, as law enforcement officials are trained to react quickly and work together.
	Additional Officers and Rescue Teams, Additional officers may arrive in teams. These teams may:
		Wear regular patrol uniforms or external bulletproof vests, Kevlar helmets, and other tactical equipment.
		Be armed with rifles, shotguns, and/or handguns.
		Use pepper spray or tear gas to control the situation.
		Shout commands, and may push individuals to the ground for their safety.
		Emergency medical personnel will also arrive at the scene. Rescue teams will treat and remove any injured persons. These teams may also request able-bodied individuals to assist in removing the wounded from the premises.
How To React
	When law enforcement arrives:
	Remain calm, and follow officers’ instructions., Put down any items in your hands (i.e., bags, jackets).
	Immediately raise hands and spread fingers., Keep hands visible at all times.,Avoid making quick movements toward officers, avoid physical contact.	Avoid pointing, screaming, and/or yelling. 	do not stop to ask officers for help or direction when running—just proceed in the direction from which officers are entering the premises.	Information and Assembly Points
	After you have reached a safe location or assembly point, you will likely be held in that area by law enforcement until the situation is under control, and all witnesses have been identified and questioned.
	Do not leave the safe location or assembly point until law enforcement authorities have instructed you to do so.
	Preparedness & Prevention
	The next section covers actions to take to prepare for and prevent potential active shooter incidents.
	Graphics representing the three topic areas covered in the course: Respond, Prepare (Highlighted), and Follow Up
Preparedness
	Your Emergency Action Plan is a useful tool for preparing for an active shooter incident.
	Ensure that your facility has at least two evacuation routes.
	Clearly post and mark evacuation routes in conspicuous locations throughout your facility.
	Items to include in the plan are ensuring that all necessary staff have access and keys.
	Conduct exercises.
	Include local law enforcement and first responders during training exercises.
	Encourage law enforcement, emergency responders, SWAT teams, canine teams, and bomb squads to train for an active shooter scenario at your location.
Video Transcript - Active Shooter - Preparedness
	A lack of preparedness in responding effectively to an active shooter can have disastrous consequences.

	For example, shooting occurred in one room of a warehouse. The police investigation found that there was only one way in and out. Because of a lack of a secondary evacuation route, the employees in that room were cornered by the active shooter.

	Developing an Emergency Action Plan to address this could have helped prevent additional casualties in this case. An Emergency Action Plan addresses critical policies and procedures, for: reporting emergencies and evacuation of the premises.

	In addition, the Emergency Action Plan specifies responsibilities and key contact information. And, the Emergency Action Plan should include an emergency notification system In the event that evacuation is necessary, facilities should have at least two evacuation routes that are conspicuous and well marked.

	After the Emergency Action Plan is in place, staff should be trained in responding to active shooter situations, including the use of exercises that involve local law enforcement.

	With an effective Emergency Action Plan and training, staff will be better prepared to respond to an active shooter incident and other emergencies.

	Emergency Action Plan
	To best prepare your employees for an active shooter situation, the first thing you should do is create an Emergency Action Plan.

	Create the Emergency Action Plan with input from several stakeholders including your human resources department, your training department (if one exists), facility owners/operators, your property manager, and local law enforcement and/or emergency responders.

	Conduct drills and exercise your Emergency Action Plan at least once a year. Ensure that your Emergency Action Plan includes actions for persons with disabilities and access and functional needs; guests and visitors; contains bi-lingual language; needs for all populations.

The Emergency Action Plan will prepare your employees to respond effectively and help minimize loss of life.
	Components of an Effective Emergency Action Plan
	An effective Emergency Action Plan includes:
	A preferred method for reporting fires and other emergencies.
An evacuation policy and procedure.
	Emergency escape procedures and route assignments (i.e., floor plans, safe areas).
	Contact information for—and responsibilities of—individuals to be contacted under the Emergency Action Plan.
	Information concerning local area hospitals (i.e., name, telephone number, and distance from your location).
	An emergency notification system to alert various parties of an emergency, including:
	Individuals at remote locations within premises.
	Local law enforcement.
	Local area hospitals.
	Training Exercises
	Another important aspect of preparedness is training. The most effective way to train your employees to respond to an active shooter situation is to conduct mock active shooter training exercises. Local law enforcement organizations are an excellent resource in designing training exercises.

Employees should be trained in:
	Recognizing the sound of gunshots.
	Reacting quickly when gunshots are heard and/or when a shooting is witnessed. Training should cover:
	Run, Hide, Fight as a last resort. Calling 911, Reacting when law enforcement arrives, Adopting the survival mindset during times of crisis.
	For more information on training exercises, refer to IS-120.a An Introduction to Exercises and IS-130 Exercise Evaluation and Planning. Links are provided at the end of this course.

Meeting Everyone’s Needs
	In addition to developing an Emergency Action Plan and conducting training, you should:
	Ensure that plans, evacuation instructions, and any other relevant information include provisions for individuals with access and functional needs.
	Ensure that your building is accessible for individuals with access and functional needs, in compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
Facility Managers’ Responsibilities (1 of 2)
Facility managers should:
	Institute access controls (e.g., keys, security system pass codes).
	Distribute critical items to appropriate managers/employees, including:
	Floor plans.
	Keys, and other access-control measures.
	Facility personnel lists and telephone numbers.
	Daily schedule.
	Assemble crisis kits containing:
	Radios.
	Floor plans.
	Employee roster and emergency contact numbers.
	First aid kits.
	Flashlights.
	Activate the emergency notification system when an emergency situation occurs.
Facility Managers’ Responsibilities (2 of 2)
Facility managers should also:
	Ensure that the facility has at least two evacuation routes.
	Coordinate with the facility’s security department to ensure the physical security of the location.
	Post evacuation routes in conspicuous locations throughout the facility.
	Place removable floor plans near entrances and exits for emergency responders.
	Include local law enforcement and first responders during training exercises.
	Encourage law enforcement, emergency responders, SWAT teams, canine teams, and bomb squads to train for an active shooter scenario at their location.
	Foster a respectful workplace.
	Be aware of indications of workplace violence and take remedial actions accordingly.
	Prevention
Prevention measures include:
	Being aware of indications of workplace violence and taking remedial actions accordingly.
	Fostering a respectful workplace.
	Video Transcript - Active Shooter - Prevention
	Current or former employees typically do not become violent unexpectedly. Instead, they display indicators of potentially violent behavior over time.

	For example, days before the office shooting at a software company, the shooter angrily confronted management over personal financial issues. One member of payroll told her family that his behavior frightened her. A few days later, the shooter then asked two of his coworkers to sign his will.

	The shooter at the warehouse incident was fired six months earlier for poor performance. It was reported that he showed up late or missed entire days and was argumentative.

	Explosive outbursts of anger, talk of financial problems, and repeated violations of company policies are just some indicators of potentially violent behavior. In order to help prevent potential active shooter incidents, we must alert a supervisor or other official if we believe an employee or coworker exhibits potentially violent behavior.
	And, finally fostering a respectful workplace is one of the best measures for preventing an active shooter incident.

Human Resources Responsibilities
	Your human resources department should engage in planning for emergency situations, including an active shooter scenario.
	Planning for emergency situations can help to mitigate the likelihood of an incident by resulting in processes such as:
	Conducting effective employee screening and background checks.
	Creating a system for reporting signs of potentially violent behavior.
	Making counseling services available to employees.
	Developing an Emergency Action Plan that includes policies and procedures for dealing with an active shooter situation, as well as after-action planning.
	Recognizing Potential Workplace Violence
	An active shooter in your workplace may be a current or former employee, or an acquaintance of a current or former employee.

	Intuitive managers and coworkers may notice characteristics of potentially violent behavior in an employee. Alert your supervisor or human resources department if you believe an employee or coworker exhibits potentially violent behavior.

Indicators of Potential Violence
	Employees typically do not just “snap,” but display indicators of potentially violent behavior over time. If these behaviors are recognized, they can often be managed and treated.

Indicators of potentially violent behavior by an employee may include:
Depression/withdrawal.
	Repeated violations of company policies.
	Explosive outbursts of anger or rage without provocation.
	Behavior that may suggest paranoia (e.g., “everybody is against me”).
	Escalation of domestic problems into the workplace.
	Talk of severe financial problems.
	Talk of previous incidents of violence.
Source: DHS Active Shooter Booklet
Additional Indicators of Potential Workplace Violence
Note: This list of behaviors is not comprehensive, nor is it intended as a mechanism for diagnosing violent tendencies.

Indicators of potentially violent behavior by an employee may include:
	Increased use of alcohol and/or illegal drugs.
	Unexplained increase in absenteeism; vague physical complaints.
	Noticeable decrease in attention to appearance and hygiene.
	Depression and/or withdrawal.
	Resistance and overreaction to changes in policy and procedures.
Repeated violations of organizational policies.
	Increased severe mood swings.
	Noticeably unstable, emotional responses.
	Explosive outbursts of anger or rage without provocation.
	Suicidal; comments about “putting things in order.”
	Behavior that may suggest paranoia (e.g., “everybody is against me”).
	Increasingly frequent mentions of problems at home.
	Escalation of domestic problems into the workplace.
	Talk of severe financial problems.
	Talk of previous incidents of violence.
Empathy with individuals committing violence.
	Increase in unsolicited comments about firearms, other dangerous weapons, and violent crimes.
	
	Report violent acts or threats of violence to your immediate supervisor, security or human resources. Regardless of the type of workplace violence, the chances for prevention improve with increased awareness of potential warning signs and rapid response to a problem.

The IS-106: 
	Workplace Violence Awareness Training course offers more information about violence in the workplace, how to recognize the warning signs, and what actions to take to prevent or minimize violence. While this course is designed specifically for FEMA personnel, it is applicable in all work environments. A link is provided at the end of this course.

Followup Actions
Managing the consequences.
	Accounting for all individuals.
	Determining method for notifying families.
	Assessing needs and making referrals.
	Capturing lessons learned.
	Analyzing the situation.
	Creating an after-action report.
	Refining Emergency Action Plan.
Video Transcript - Active Shooter - Followup Actions
	After an incident occurs, it is important to manage the consequences, and analyze the lessons learned. Post-event activities includes accounting for missing persons, determining a method for notifying families of victims, and referring individuals at the scene for follow-up care including grief counseling.

To facilitate effective planning for future emergencies, it is important to analyze the recent active shooter situation and create an after action report. And these lesson learned should be used to refine the Emergency Action Plan and provide needed training.

	Managing the consequences of an incident and identifying lessons learned promotes the well-being of those involved and facilitates preparedness for future emergencies.
Managing the Consequences
	After the active shooter has been incapacitated and is no longer a threat, human resources and/or management should engage in post-event 	assessments and activities, including:
	An accounting of all individuals at a designated assembly point to determine who, if anyone, is missing and potentially injured.
	Determining a method for notifying families of individuals affected by the active shooter, including notification of any casualties.
	Assessing the psychological state of individuals at the scene, and referring them to health care specialists accordingly.
	Identifying and filling any critical personnel or operational gaps left in the organization as a result of the incident.
Lessons Learned
	To facilitate effective planning for future emergencies, it is important to analyze the recent active shooter situation and create an after-action report. The analysis and recommendations contained in this report are useful for:
Serving as documentation for response activities.
	Identifying successes and failures that occurred during the event.
	Providing an analysis of the effectiveness of the existing Emergency Action Plan.
	Describing and defining a plan for making improvements to the Emergency Action Plan.
	Active Shooter Booklet, Pocket Guide, and Poster

	It is recommended that you download copies of the following resources prior to completing this course. Select a resource to access each publication:
Active Shooter Desk Reference Guide: 
	The booklet provides guidance to individuals, including managers and employees, who become involved in an active shooter situation, and discusses how to react when law enforcement responds.
	Active Shooter Pocket-Sized Reference Card: 
	
	This guide provides a brief overview of how best to respond to an active shooter situation.
	Active Shooter Poster: 
	
	This poster describes how to respond to an active shooter, as well as how to recognize signs of potential workplace violence.
	Active Shooter materials help managers, employees, training staff, and human resources personnel mitigate the risk of, and appropriate reaction to an active shooter situation.
Additional Resources
Select a resource below for additional information:
	Commercial Facilities Sector Training and Resources: This Web site provides various resources for the Commercial Facilities Sector, including three courses, links to subsector tools and webinars, and informational videos.
IS-120.
	a An Introduction to Exercises: This course introduces the basics of emergency management exercises and builds a foundation for subsequent exercise courses, which provide the specifics of the Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program (HSEEP).
IS-130 Exercise Evaluation and Design: 
	This course introduces the basics of emergency management exercise evaluation and improvement planning.
	Lessons Learned Information Sharing: This information and collaboration resource serves as the national, online network of lessons learned, best practices, and innovative ideas for the emergency management and homeland security communities.
	Safety Tips & Guidelines Regarding Potential "Active Shooter" Incidents Occurring on Campus, University of California Police: This document defines an active shooter, and provides tips and guidelines for responding to active shooter scenarios.

	Shots Fired, When Lightning Strikes (DVD), Center for Personal Protection and Safety (2007): This DVD provides strategies to prevent and survive active shooter situations.

How to Plan for Workplace Emergencies and Evacuations, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Health and Safety Administration, OSHA 3088 (2001): This booklet provides a general overview of dealing with emergency situations, including developing an evacuation plan, training employees, and utilizing resources.
Course Summary
In the event of an active shooter situation:
Run, Attempt to evacuate, Have an escape route and plan, Leave your belongings, Keep your hands visible
	Hide
	Find a place to hide
	Block entry and lock doors
	Remain quiet and silence your cell phone or pager

	Fight, As a last resort, try to incapacitate the shooter, Act with physical aggression

Remember to always:
	Take note of the two nearest exits in any facility you visit.
	Be aware of your environment and any possible dangers.
	CALL 911 WHEN IT IS SAFE TO DO SO!


